
## Defining Data Classifications

### Government

The U.S. government provides clear definitions for these classifications. As you read them, note that the wording of each definition is close except for a few key words. Top secret uses the phrase “exceptionally grave damage,” secret uses the phrase “serious damage,” and confidential uses “damage”:
- **Top Secret** The top secret label is “applied to information, the unauthorized disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause exceptionally grave damage to the national security that the original classification authority is able to identify or describe.”
- **Secret** The secret label is “applied to information, the unauthorized disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause serious damage to the national security that the original classification authority is able to identify or describe.”
- **Confidential** The confidential label is “applied to information, the unauthorized disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security that the original classification authority is able to identify or describe.”
- **Unclassified** Unclassified refers to any data that doesn’t meet one of the descriptions for top secret, secret, or confidential data. Within the United States, unclassified data is available to anyone, though it often requires individuals to request the information using procedures identified in the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).

There are additional subclassifications of unclassified, such as for official use only (FOUO) and sensitive but unclassified (SBU). Documents with these designations have strict controls limiting their distribution. As an example, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) uses SBU for individual tax records, restricting access to these records.

### Nongovernmental organizations

- **Confidential or Proprietary** The confidential or proprietary label typically refers to the highest level of classified data. In this context, a data breach would cause exceptionally grave damage to the mission of the organization. As an example, attackers have repeatedly attacked Sony, stealing more than 100 terabytes of data, including full-length versions of unreleased movies. These quickly showed up on file-sharing sites, and security experts estimate that people downloaded these movies up to a million times. With pirated versions of the movies available, many people skipped seeing them when Sony ultimately released them. This directly affected Sony’s bottom line. The movies were proprietary, and the organization might have considered it exceptionally grave damage. In retrospect, they may choose to label movies as confidential or proprietary and use the strongest access controls to protect them.
- **Private** The private label refers to data that should stay private within the organization but that doesn’t meet the definition of confidential or proprietary data. In this context, a data breach would cause serious damage to the mission of the organization. Many organizations label PII and PHI data as private. It’s also common to label internal employee data and some financial data as private. As an example, the payroll department of a company would have access to payroll data, but this data is not available to regular employees.
- **Sensitive** Sensitive data is similar to confidential data. In this context, a data breach would cause damage to the mission of the organization. As an example, IT personnel within an organization might have extensive data about the internal network, including the layout, devices, operating systems, software, Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, and more. If attackers have easy access to this data, it makes it much easier for them to launch attacks. Management may decide they don’t want this information available to the public, so they might label it as sensitive.
- **Public** Public data is similar to unclassified data. It includes information posted in websites, brochures, or any other public source. Although an organization doesn’t protect the confidentiality of public data, it does take steps to protect its integrity. For example, anyone can view public data posted on a website. However, an organization doesn’t want attackers to modify this data, so it takes steps to protect it.