# Exam Guide

## Chapter 1

- Understand the CIA Triad elements of confidentiality, integrity, and availability. Confidentiality is the principle that objects are not disclosed to unauthorized subjects. Integrity is the principle that objects retain their veracity and are intentionally modified only by authorized subjects. Availability is the principle that authorized subjects are granted timely and uninterrupted access to objects.
- Know the elements of AAA services. AAA is composed of identification, authentication, authorization, auditing, and accountability.
- Be able to explain how identification works. Identification is the process by which a subject professes an identity and accountability is initiated. A subject must provide an identity to a system to start the process of authentication, authorization, and accountability.
- Understand the process of authentication. Authentication is the process of verifying or testing that a claimed identity is valid. Authentication requires information from the subject that must exactly correspond to the identity indicated.
- Know how authorization fits into a security plan. Once a subject is authenticated, its access must be authorized. The process of authorization ensures that the requested activity or object access is possible given the rights and privileges assigned to the authenticated identity.
- Be able to explain the auditing process. Auditing is the programmatic means by which subjects are held accountable for their actions while authenticated on a system through the documentation or recording of subject activities.
- Understand the importance of accountability. Security can be maintained only if subjects are held accountable for their actions. Effective accountability relies on the capability to prove a subject’s identity and track their activities.
- Be able to explain nonrepudiation. Nonrepudiation ensures that the subject of an activity or event cannot deny that the event occurred. It prevents a subject from claiming not to have sent a message, not to have performed an action, or not to have been the cause of an event.
- Know about defense in depth. Defense in depth, also known as layering, is simply the use of multiple controls in a series. Using a multilayered solution allows for numerous different controls to guard against whatever threats come to pass.
- Be able to explain the concept of abstraction. Abstraction is used to collect similar elements into groups, classes, or roles that are assigned security controls, restrictions, or permissions as a collective. It adds efficiency to carrying out a security plan.
- Understand data hiding. Data hiding is exactly what it sounds like: preventing data from being discovered or accessed by a subject. It is often a key element in security controls as well as in programming.
- Know about security boundaries. A security boundary is the line of intersection between any two areas, subnets, or environments that have different security requirements or needs.
- Understand security governance. Security governance is the collection of practices related to supporting, defining, and directing the security efforts of an organization.
- Know about third-party governance. Third-party governance is the system of external entity oversight that may be mandated by law, regulation, industry standards, contractual obligation, or licensing requirements. The actual method of governance may vary, but it generally involves an outside investigator or auditor.
- Understand documentation review. Documentation review is the process of reading the exchanged materials and verifying them against standards and expectations. In many situations, especially related to government or military agencies or contractors, failing to provide sufficient documentation to meet requirements of third-party governance can result in a loss of or a voiding of authorization to operate (ATO).
- Understand alignment of security function to business strategy, goals, mission, and objectives. Security management planning ensures proper creation, implementation, and enforcement of a security policy. Security management planning aligns the security functions to the strategy, goals, mission, and objectives of the organization. This includes designing and implementing security based on business cases, budget restrictions, or scarcity of resources.
- Know what a business case is. A business case is usually a documented argument or stated position in order to define a need to make a decision or take some form of action. To make a business case is to demonstrate a business-specific need to alter an existing process or choose an approach to a business task. A business case is often made to justify the start of a new project, especially a project related to security.
- Understand security management planning. Security management is based on three types of plans: strategic, tactical, and operational. A strategic plan is a long-term plan that is fairly stable. It defines the organization’s goals, mission, and objectives. The tactical plan is a midterm plan developed to provide more details on accomplishing the goals set forth in the strategic plan. Operational plans are short-term and highly detailed plans based on the strategic and tactical plans.
- Know the elements of a formalized security policy structure. To create a comprehensive security plan, you need the following items in place: security policy, standards, baselines, guidelines, and procedures.
- Understand organizational process. Security governance needs to address every aspect of an organization. This includes the organizational processes of acquisitions, divestitures, and governance committees.
- Understand key security roles. The primary security roles are senior manager, security professional, asset owner, custodian, user, and auditor.
- Know the basics of COBIT. Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT) is a security concept infrastructure used to organize the complex security solutions of companies.
- Understand due diligence and due care. Due diligence is establishing a plan, policy, and process to protect the interests of an organization. Due care is practicing the individual activities that maintain the due diligence effort. Due diligence is knowing what should be done and planning for it; due care is doing the right action at the right time.
- Know the basics of threat modeling. Threat modeling is the security process where potential threats are identified, categorized, and analyzed. Threat modeling can be performed as a proactive measure during design and development or as a reactive measure once a product has been deployed. Key concepts include assets/attackers/software, STRIDE, PASTA, VAST, diagramming, reduction/decomposing, and DREAD.
- Understand supply chain risk management (SCRM) concepts. SCRM is a means to ensure that all the vendors or links in the supply chain are reliable, trustworthy, reputable organizations that disclose their practices and security requirements to their business partners. SCRM includes evaluating risks associated with hardware, software, and services; performing thirdparty assessment and monitoring; establishing minimum security requirements; and enforcing service-level requirements.

## Chapter 2

- Understand that humans are a key element in security. Humans are often considered the weakest element in any security solution. No matter what physical or logical controls are deployed, humans can discover ways to avoid them, circumvent or subvert them, or disable them. However, people can also become a key security asset when they are properly trained and are motivated to protect not only themselves but the security of the organization as well.
- Know the importance of job descriptions. Without a job description, there is no consensus on what type of individual should be hired. Thus, crafting job descriptions is the first step in defining security needs related to personnel and being able to seek out new hires.
- Understand the security implications of hiring new employees. To properly plan for security, you must have standards in place for job descriptions, job classification, work tasks, job responsibilities, prevention of collusion, candidate screening, background checks, security clearances, employment agreements, and nondisclosure agreements. By deploying such mechanisms, you ensure that new hires are aware of the required security standards, thus protecting your organization’s assets.
- Understand onboarding and offboarding. Onboarding is the process of adding new employees to the organization using socialization and orientation. Offboarding is the removal of an employee’s identity from the IAM system once that person has left the organization.
- Know the principle of least privilege. The principle of least privilege states that users should be granted the minimum amount of access necessary for them to complete their required work tasks or job responsibilities.
- Understand the need for a nondisclosure agreement (NDA). An NDA is used to protect the confidential information within an organization from being disclosed by a former employee. When a person signs an NDA, they agree not to disclose any information that is defined as confidential to anyone outside the organization.
- Know about employee oversight. Throughout the employment lifetime of personnel, managers should regularly review or audit the job descriptions, work tasks, privileges, and responsibilities for every staff member.
- Know why mandatory vacations are necessary. Mandatory vacations of one to two weeks are used to audit and verify the work tasks and privileges of employees. This often results in easy detection of abuse, fraud, or negligence.
- Know about UBA and UEBA. User behavior analytics (UBA) and user and entity behavior analytics (UEBA) are the concepts of analyzing the behavior of users, subjects, visitors, customers, etc. for some specific goal or purpose.
- Understand employee transfers. Personnel transfers may be treated as a fire/rehire rather than a personnel move. This depends on the organization’s policies and the means they have determined to best manage this change. Some of the elements that go into making the decision as to which procedure to use include whether the same user account will be retained, if their clearance will be adjusted, if their new work responsibilities are similar to the previous position, and if a “clean slate” account is required for auditing purposes in the new job position.
- Be able to explain proper termination policies. A termination policy defines the procedure for terminating employees. It should include items such as always having a witness, disabling the employee’s network access, and performing an exit interview. A termination policy should also include escorting the terminated employee off the premises and requiring the return of security tokens and badges and company property.
- Understand vendor, consultant, and contractor controls. Vendor, consultant, and contractor controls are used to define the levels of performance, expectation, compensation, and consequences for entities, persons, or organizations that are external to the primary organization. Often these controls are defined in a document or policy known as a service-level agreement (SLA).
- Understand policy compliance. Compliance is the act of conforming to or adhering to rules, policies, regulations, standards, or requirements. Compliance is an important concern to security governance. On a personnel level, compliance is related to whether individual employees follow company policy and perform their job tasks in accordance with defined procedures.
- Know how privacy fits into the realm of IT security. Know the multiple meanings/definitions of privacy, why it is important to protect, and the issues surrounding it, especially in a work environment.
- Be able to define overall risk management. The process of identifying factors that could damage or disclose data, evaluating those factors in light of data value and countermeasure cost, and implementing cost-effective solutions for mitigating or reducing risk is known as risk management. By performing risk management, you lay the foundation for reducing risk overall.
- Understand risk analysis and the key elements involved. Risk analysis is the process by which upper management is provided with details to make decisions about which risks are to be mitigated, which should be transferred, and which should be accepted. To fully evaluate risks and subsequently take the proper precautions, you must analyze the following: assets, asset valuation, threats, vulnerability, exposure, risk, realized risk, safeguards, countermeasures, attacks, and breaches.
- Know how to evaluate threats. Threats can originate from numerous sources, including IT, humans, and nature. Threat assessment should be performed as a team effort to provide the widest range of perspectives. By fully evaluating risks from all angles, you reduce your system’s vulnerability.
- Understand qualitative risk analysis. Qualitative risk analysis is based more on scenarios than calculations. Exact dollar figures are not assigned to possible losses; instead, threats are ranked on a scale to evaluate their risks, costs, and effects. Such an analysis assists those responsible for creating proper risk management policies.
- Understand the Delphi technique. The Delphi technique is simply an anonymous feedback-and-response process used to arrive at a consensus. Such a consensus gives the responsible parties the opportunity to properly evaluate risks and implement solutions.
- Understand quantitative risk analysis. Quantitative risk analysis focuses on hard values and percentages. A complete quantitative analysis is not possible because of intangible aspects of risk. The process involves valuing assets and identifying threats and then determining a threat’s potential frequency and the resulting damage, which leads to the risk response tasks of the cost/benefit analysis of safeguards.
- Be able to explain the concept of an exposure factor (EF). An EF is an element of quantitative risk analysis that represents the percentage of loss that an organization would experience if a specific asset were violated by a realized risk. By calculating exposure factors, you are able to implement a sound risk management policy.
- Know what single loss expectancy (SLE) is and how to calculate it. SLE is an element of quantitative risk analysis that represents the cost associated with a single realized risk against a specific asset. The formula is SLE = asset value (AV) * exposure factor (EF).
- Understand annualized rate of occurrence (ARO). ARO is an element of quantitative risk analysis that represents the expected frequency with which a specific threat or risk will occur (in other words, become realized) within a single year. Understanding AROs further enables you to calculate the risk and take proper precautions.
- Know what annualized loss expectancy (ALE) is and how to calculate it. ALE is an element of quantitative risk analysis that represents the possible yearly cost of all instances of a specific realized threat against a specific asset. The formula is ALE = single loss expectancy (SLE) * annualized rate of occurrence (ARO).
- Know the formula for safeguard evaluation. In addition to determining the annual cost of a safeguard, you must calculate the ALE for the asset if the safeguard is implemented. Use this formula: ALE before safeguard – ALE after implementing the safeguard – annual cost of safeguard = value of the safeguard to the company, or (ALE1 – ALE2) – ACS.
- Know the options for handling risk. Reducing risk, or risk mitigation, is the implementation of safeguards and countermeasures. Assigning risk or transferring a risk places the cost of loss a risk represents onto another entity or organization. Purchasing insurance is one form of assigning or transferring risk. Risk deterrence is the process of implementing deterrents to would-be violators of security and policy. Risk avoidance is the process of selecting alternate options or activities that have less associated risk than the default, common, expedient, or cheap option. Accepting risk means management has evaluated the cost/benefit analysis of possible safeguards and has determined that the cost of the countermeasure greatly outweighs the possible cost of loss due to a risk. It also means that management has agreed to accept the consequences and the loss if the risk is realized.
- Be able to explain total risk, residual risk, and the controls gap. Total risk is the amount of risk an organization would face if no safeguards were implemented. To calculate total risk, use this formula: threats * vulnerabilities * asset value = total risk. Residual risk is the risk that management has chosen to accept rather than mitigate. The difference between total risk and residual risk is the controls gap, which is the amount of risk that is reduced by implementing safeguards. To calculate residual risk, use the following formula: total risk – controls gap = residual risk.
- Understand control types. The term control refers to a broad range of controls that perform such tasks as ensuring that only authorized users can log on and preventing unauthorized users from gaining access to resources. Control types include preventive, deterrent, detective, compensation, corrective, recovery, and directive. Controls can also be categorized by how they are implemented: administrative, logical, or physical.
- Understand security control assessment (SCA). An SCA is the formal evaluation of a security infrastructure’s individual mechanisms against a baseline or reliability expectation.
- Understand security monitoring and measurement. Security controls should provide benefits that can be monitored and measured. If a security control’s benefits cannot be quantified, evaluated, or compared, then it does not actually provide any security.
- Understand risk reporting. Risk reporting involves the production of a risk report and a presentation of that report to the interested/relevant parties. A risk report should be accurate, timely, comprehensive of the entire organization, clear and precise to support decision-making, and updated on a regular basis.
- Know the need for continuous improvement. Security is always changing. Thus, any implemented security solution requires updates and changes over time. If a continuous improvement path is not provided by a selected countermeasure, then it should be replaced with one that offers scalable improvements to security.
- Understand the Risk Maturity Model (RMM). The Risk Maturity Model (RMM) is a means to assess the key indicators and activities of a mature, sustainable, and repeatable risk management process. The RMM levels are ad hoc, preliminary, defined, integrated, and optimized.
- Know about legacy system security risk. Legacy systems are often a threat because they may not be receiving security updates from their vendors. End-of-life (EOL) is the point at which a manufacturer no longer produces a product. End-of-service-life (EOSL) or end-of-support (EOS) are those that are no longer receiving updates and support from the vendor.
- Know about risk frameworks. A risk framework is a guideline or recipe for how risk is to be assessed, resolved, and monitored. The primary example of a risk framework referenced by the CISSP exam is the Risk Management Framework (RMF) defined by NIST in SP 800-37 Rev. 2. Others include ISO/IEC 31000, ISO/IEC 31004, COSO, Risk IT, OCTAVE, FAIR, and TARA.
- Understand social engineering. Social engineering is a form of attack that exploits human nature and human behavior. The common social engineering principles are authority, intimidation, consensus, scarcity, familiarity, trust, and urgency. Such attacks may be used to elicit information or gain access through the use of pretexting and/or prepending. Social engineering attacks include phishing, spear phishing, business email compromise (BEC), whaling, smishing, vishing, spam, shoulder surfing, invoice scams, hoaxes, impersonation, masquerading, tailgating, piggybacking, dumpster diving, identity fraud, typo squatting, and influence campaigns.
- Know how to implement security awareness training and education. Before actual training can take place, awareness of security as a recognized entity must be created for users. Once this is accomplished, training, or teaching employees to perform their work tasks and to comply with the security policy, can begin. All new employees require some level of training so that they will be able to comply with all standards, guidelines, and procedures mandated by the security policy. Education is a more detailed endeavor in which students/users learn much more than they actually need to know to perform their work tasks. Education is most often associated with users pursuing certification or seeking job promotion.
- Know about security champions. Often a security champion is a member of a group who decides (or is assigned) to take charge of leading the adoption and integration of security concepts into the group’s work activities. Security champions are often non-security employees who take up the mantle to encourage others to support and adopt more security practices and behaviors.
- Understand gamification. Gamification is a means to encourage compliance and engagement by integrating common elements of game play into other activities, such as security compliance and behavior change.
- Know about the need for periodic content reviews and effectiveness evaluations. It is important to perform periodic content reviews of all training materials. This is to ensure that the training materials and presentation stays in line with business goals, organizational mission, and security objectives. Some means of verification should be used to measure whether the training is beneficial or a waste of time and resources.

## Chapter 3

- Understand the four steps of the business continuity planning process. Business continuity planning involves four distinct phases: project scope and planning, business impact analysis, continuity planning, and approval and implementation. Each task contributes to the overall goal of ensuring that business operations continue uninterrupted in the face of an emergency.
- Describe how to perform the business organization analysis. In the business organization analysis, the individuals responsible for leading the BCP process determine which departments and individuals have a stake in the business continuity plan. This analysis serves as the foundation for BCP team selection and, after validation by the BCP team, is used to guide the next stages of BCP development.
- List the necessary members of the business continuity planning team. The BCP team should contain, at a minimum, representatives from each of the operational and support departments; technical experts from the IT department; physical and IT security personnel with BCP skills; legal representatives familiar with corporate legal, regulatory, and contractual responsibilities; and representatives from senior management. Additional team members depend on the structure and nature of the organization.
- Know the legal and regulatory requirements that face business continuity planners. Business leaders must exercise due diligence to ensure that shareholders’ interests are protected in the event disaster strikes. Some industries are also subject to federal, state, and local regulations that mandate specific BCP procedures. Many businesses also have contractual obligations to their clients that they must meet before, during, and after a disaster.
- Explain the steps of the business impact analysis process. The five stages of the business impact analysis process are the identification of priorities, risk identification, likelihood assessment, impact analysis, and resource prioritization.
- Describe the process used to develop a continuity strategy. During the strategy development phase, the BCP team determines which risks they will mitigate. In the provisions and processes phase, the team designs mechanisms and procedures that will mitigate identified risks. The plan must then be approved by senior management and implemented. Personnel must also receive training on their roles in the BCP process.
- Explain the importance of comprehensively documenting an organization’s business continuity plan. Committing the plan to writing provides the organization with a written record of the procedures to follow when disaster strikes. It prevents the “it’s in my head” syndrome and ensures the orderly progress of events in an emergency.

## Chapter 4

- Understand the differences between criminal law, civil law, and administrative law. Criminal law protects society against acts that violate the basic principles we believe in. Violations of criminal law are prosecuted by federal and state governments. Civil law provides the framework for the transaction of business between people and organizations. Violations of civil law are brought to the court and argued by the two affected parties. Administrative law is used by government agencies to effectively carry out their day-to-day business.
- Be able to explain the basic provisions of the major laws designed to protect society against computer crime. The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (as amended) protects computers used by the government or in interstate commerce from a variety of abuses. The Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) makes it a crime to invade the electronic privacy of an individual.
- Know the differences among copyrights, trademarks, patents, and trade secrets. Copyrights protect original works of authorship, such as books, articles, poems, and songs. Trademarks are names, slogans, and logos that identify a company, product, or service. Patents provide protection to the creators of new inventions. Trade secret law protects the operating secrets of a firm.
- Be able to explain the basic provisions of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act prohibits the circumvention of copy protection mechanisms placed in digital media and limits the liability of internet service providers for the activities of their users.
- Know the basic provisions of the Economic Espionage Act of 1996. The Economic Espionage Act provides penalties for individuals found guilty of the theft of trade secrets. Harsher penalties apply when the individual knows that the information will benefit a foreign government.
- Understand the various types of software license agreements. Contractual license agreements are written agreements between a software vendor and user. Shrink-wrap agreements are written on software packaging and take effect when a user opens the package. Click-through agreements are included in a package but require the user to accept the terms during the software installation process.
- Understand the notification requirements placed on organizations that experience a data breach. California’s SB 1386 implemented the first statewide requirement to notify individuals of a breach of their personal information. All other states eventually followed suit with similar laws. Currently, federal law only requires the notification of individuals when a HIPAA-covered entity breaches their protected health information.
- Understand the major laws that govern privacy of personal information in the United States, the European Union, and Canada. The United States has a number of privacy laws that affect the government’s use of information as well as the use of information by specific industries, such as financial services companies and healthcare organizations that handle sensitive information. The EU has a more comprehensive General Data Protection Regulation that governs the use and exchange of personal information. In Canada, the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) governs the use of personal information.
- Explain the importance of a well-rounded compliance program. Most organizations are subject to a wide variety of legal and regulatory requirements related to information security. Building a compliance program ensures that you become and remain compliant with these often overlapping requirements.
- Know how to incorporate security into the procurement and vendor governance process. The expanded use of cloud services by many organizations requires added attention to conducting reviews of information security controls during the vendor selection process and as part of ongoing vendor governance.
- Be able to determine compliance and other requirements for information protection. Cybersecurity professionals must be able to analyze a situation and determine what jurisdictions and laws apply. They must be able to identify relevant contractual, legal, regulatory, and industry standards and interpret them for their given situation.
- Know legal and regulatory issues and how they pertain to information security. Understand the concepts of cybercrime and data breaches and be able to apply them in your environment when incidents arise. Understand what licensing and intellectual property protections apply to your organization’s data and your obligations when encountering data belonging to other organizations. Understand the privacy and export control issues associated with transferring information across international borders.


## Chapter 5 Protecting Security of Assets

- Understand the importance of data and asset classifications. Data owners are responsible for defining data and asset classifications and ensuring that data and systems are properly marked. Additionally, data owners define requirements to protect data at different classifications, such as encrypting sensitive data at rest and in transit. Data classifications are typically defined within security policies or data policies.
- Define PII and PHI. Personally identifiable information (PII) is any information that can identify an individual. Protected health information (PHI) is any health-related information that can be related to a specific person. Many laws and regulations mandate the protection of PII and PHI.
- Know how to manage sensitive information. Sensitive information is any type of classified information, and proper management helps prevent unauthorized disclosure resulting in a loss of confidentiality. Proper management includes marking, handling, storing, and destroying sensitive information. The two areas where organizations often miss the mark are adequately protecting backup media holding sensitive information and sanitizing media or equipment when it is at the end of its lifecycle.
- Describe the three data states. The three data states are at rest, in transit, and in use. Data at rest is any data stored on media such as hard drives or external media. Data in transit is any data transmitted over a network. Encryption methods protect data at rest and in transit. Data in use refers to data in memory and used by an application. Applications should flush memory buffers to remove data after it is no longer needed.
- Define DLP. Data loss prevention (DLP) systems detect and block data exfiltration attempts by scanning unencrypted files and looking for keywords and data patterns. Network-based systems (including cloud-based systems) scan files before they leave the network. Endpoint-based systems prevent users from copying or printing some files.
- Compare data destruction methods. Erasing a file doesn’t delete it. Clearing media overwrites it with characters or bits. Purging repeats the clearing process multiple times and removes data so that the media can be reused. Degaussing removes data from tapes and magnetic hard disk drives, but it does not affect optical media or SSDs. Destruction methods include incineration, crushing, shredding, and disintegration.
- Describe data remanence. Data remanence is the data that remains on media after it should have been removed. Hard disk drives sometimes retain residual magnetic flux that can be read with advanced tools. Advanced tools can read slack space on a disk, which is unused space in clusters. Erasing data on a disk leaves data remanence.
- Understand record retention policies. Record retention policies ensure that data is kept in a usable state while it is needed and destroyed when it is no longer needed. Many laws and regulations mandate keeping data for a specific amount of time, but in the absence of formal regulations, organizations specify the retention period within a policy. Audit trail data needs to be kept long enough to reconstruct past incidents, but the organization must identify how far back they want to investigate. A current trend in many organizations is to reduce legal liabilities by implementing short retention policies with email.
- Know the difference between EOL and EOS. End-of-life (EOL) is the date announced by a vendor when sales of a product stop. However, the vendor still supports the product after EOL. End-of-support (EOS) identifies the date when a vendor will no longer support a product.
- Explain DRM. Digital rights management (DRM) methods provide copyright protection for copyrighted works. The purpose is to prevent the unauthorized use, modification, and distribution of copyrighted works.
- Explain CASB. A cloud access security broker (CASB) is placed logically between users and cloud resources. It can apply internal security controls to cloud resources. The CASB component can be placed on-premises or in the cloud.
- Define pseudonymization. Pseudonymization is the process of replacing some data elements with pseudonyms or aliases. It removes privacy data so that a dataset can be shared. However, the original data remains available in a separate dataset.
- Define tokenization. Tokenization replaces data elements with a string of characters or a token. Credit card processors replace credit card data with a token, and a third party holds the mapping to the original data and the token.
- Define anonymization. Anonymization replaces privacy data with useful but inaccurate data. The dataset can be shared and used for analysis purposes, but anonymization removes individual identities. Anonymization is permanent.
- Know the responsibilities of data roles. The data owner is the person responsible for classifying, labeling, and protecting data. System owners are responsible for the systems that process the data. Business and mission owners own the processes and ensure that the systems provide value to the organization. Data controllers decide what data to process and how to process it. Data processors are often the third-party entities that process data for an organization at the direction of the data controller. Administrators grant access to data based on guidelines provided by the data owners. A user, or subject, accesses data while performing work tasks. A custodian has day-to-day responsibilities for protecting and storing data.
- Know about security control baselines. Security control baselines provide a listing of controls that an organization can apply as a baseline. Not all baselines apply to all organizations. Organizations apply scoping and tailoring techniques to adapt a baseline to their needs.


## Chapter 6 Cryptography and Symmetric Key Algorithms

- Understand the role that confidentiality, integrity, and nonrepudiation play in cryptosystems. Confidentiality is one of the major goals of cryptography. It protects the secrecy of data while it is both at rest and in transit. Integrity provides the recipient of a message with the assurance that data was not altered (intentionally or unintentionally) between the time it was created and the time it was accessed. Nonrepudiation provides undeniable proof that the sender of a message actually authored it. It prevents the sender from subsequently denying that they sent the original message.
- Know how cryptosystems can be used to achieve authentication goals. Authentication provides assurances as to the identity of a user. One possible scheme that uses authentication is the challenge-response protocol, in which the remote user is asked to encrypt a message using a key known only to the communicating parties. Authentication can be achieved with both symmetric and asymmetric cryptosystems.
- Be familiar with the basic terminology of cryptography. When a sender wants to transmit a private message to a recipient, the sender takes the plaintext (unencrypted) message and encrypts it using an algorithm and a key. This produces a ciphertext message that is transmitted to the recipient. The recipient then uses a similar algorithm and key to decrypt the ciphertext and re-create the original plaintext message for viewing.
- Understand the difference between a code and a cipher and explain the basic types of ciphers. Codes are cryptographic systems of symbols that operate on words or phrases and are sometimes secret but don’t always provide confidentiality. Ciphers, however, are always meant to hide the true meaning of a message. Know how the following types of ciphers work: transposition ciphers, substitution ciphers (including one-time pads), stream ciphers, and block ciphers.
- Know the requirements for successful use of a one-time pad. For a one-time pad to be successful, the key must be generated randomly without any known pattern. The key must be at least as long as the message to be encrypted. The pads must be protected against physical disclosure, and each pad must be used only one time and then discarded.
- Understand split knowledge. Split knowledge means that the information or privilege required to perform an operation is divided among multiple users. This ensures that no single person has sufficient privileges to compromise the security of the environment. M of N Control is an example of split knowledge used in key recovery and other sensitive tasks.
- Understand work function (work factor). Work function, or work factor, is a way to measure the strength of a cryptography system by measuring the effort in terms of cost and/or time to decrypt messages. Usually the time and effort required to perform a complete bruteforce attack against an encryption system is what a work function rating represents. The security and protection offered by a cryptosystem is directly proportional to the value of its work function/factor.
- Understand the importance of key security. Cryptographic keys provide the necessary element of secrecy to a cryptosystem. Modern cryptosystems utilize keys that are at least 128 bits long to provide adequate security.
- Know the differences between symmetric and asymmetric cryptosystems. Symmetric key cryptosystems (or secret key cryptosystems) rely on the use of a shared secret key. They are much faster than asymmetric algorithms, but they lack support for scalability, easy key distribution, and nonrepudiation. Asymmetric cryptosystems use public-private key pairs for communication between parties but operate much more slowly than symmetric algorithms.
- Be able to explain the basic operational modes of symmetric cryptosystems. Symmetric cryptosystems operate in several discrete modes: Electronic Code Book (ECB) mode, Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) mode, Cipher Feedback (CFB) mode, Output Feedback (OFB) mode, Counter (CTR) mode, Galois/Counter mode (GCM), and Counter with Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code mode (CCM). ECB mode is considered the least secure and is used only for short messages. 3DES uses three iterations of DES with two or three different keys to increase the effective key strength to 112 or 168 bits, respectively.
- Know the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) uses the Rijndael algorithm and is the U.S. government standard for the secure exchange of sensitive but unclassified data. AES uses key lengths of 128, 192, and 256 bits and a fixed block size of 128 bits to achieve a much higher level of security than that provided by the older DES algorithm.


## Chapter 7 PKI and Cryptographic Applications

- Understand the key types used in asymmetric cryptography. Public keys are freely shared among communicating parties, whereas private keys are kept secret. To encrypt a message, use the recipient’s public key. To decrypt a message, use your own private key. To sign a message, use your own private key. To validate a signature, use the sender’s public key.
- Be familiar with the three major public key cryptosystems. RSA is the most famous public key cryptosystem; it was developed by Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman in 1977. It depends on the difficulty of factoring the product of prime numbers. ElGamal is an extension of the Diffie–Hellman key exchange algorithm that depends on modular arithmetic. The elliptic curve algorithm depends on the elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem and provides more security than other algorithms when both are used with keys of the same length.
- Know the fundamental requirements of a hash function. Good hash functions have five requirements. They must allow input of any length, provide fixed-length output, make it relatively easy to compute the hash function for any input, provide one-way functionality, and be collision-resistant.
- Be familiar with the major hashing algorithms. The successors to the Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA), SHA-2 and SHA-3, make up the government standard message digest function. SHA-2 supports variable-length message digests, ranging up to 512 bits. SHA-3 improves upon the security of SHA-2 and supports the same hash lengths.
- Know how cryptographic salts improve the security of password hashing. When straightforward hashing is used to store passwords in a password file, attackers may use rainbow tables of precomputed values to identify commonly used passwords. Adding salts to the passwords before hashing them reduces the effectiveness of rainbow table attacks. Common password hashing algorithms that use key stretching to further increase the difficulty of attack include PBKDF2, bcrypt, and scrypt.
- Understand how digital signatures are generated and verified. To digitally sign a message, first use a hashing function to generate a message digest; then encrypt the digest with your private key. To verify the digital signature on a message, decrypt the signature with the sender’s public key and then compare the message digest to one you generate yourself. If they match, the message is authentic.
- Understand the public key infrastructure (PKI). In the public key infrastructure, certificate authorities (CAs) generate digital certificates containing the public keys of system users. Users then distribute these certificates to people with whom they want to communicate. Certificate recipients verify a certificate using the CA’s public key.
- Know the common applications of cryptography to secure email. The emerging standard for encrypted messages is the S/MIME protocol. Another popular email security tool is Phil Zimmerman’s Pretty Good Privacy (PGP). Most users of email encryption rely on having this technology built into their email client or their web-based email service.
- Know the common applications of cryptography to secure web activity. The de facto standard for secure web traffic is the use of HTTP over Transport Layer Security (TLS). This approach relies on hybrid cryptography using asymmetric cryptography to exchange an ephemeral session key, which is then used to carry on symmetric cryptography for the remainder of the session.
- Know the common applications of cryptography to secure networking. The IPsec protocol standard provides a common framework for encrypting network traffic and is built into a number of common operating systems. In IPsec transport mode, packet contents are encrypted for peer-to-peer communication. In tunnel mode, the entire packet, including header information, is encrypted for gateway-to-gateway communications.
- Be able to describe IPsec. IPsec is a security architecture framework that supports secure communication over IP. IPsec establishes a secure channel in either transport mode or tunnel mode. It can be used to establish direct communication between computers or to set up a VPN between networks. IPsec uses two protocols: Authentication Header (AH) and Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP).
- Be able to explain common cryptographic attacks. Ciphertext-only attacks require access only to the ciphertext of a message. One example of a ciphertext-only attack is the bruteforce attack, which attempts to randomly find the correct cryptographic key. Frequency analysis, another ciphertext-only attack, counts characters in the ciphertext to reverse substitution ciphers. Known plaintext, chosen ciphertext, and chosen plaintext attacks require the attacker to have some extra information in addition to the ciphertext. The man-in-the-middle attack fools both parties into communicating with the attacker instead of directly with each other. The birthday attack is an attempt to find collisions in hash functions. The replay attack is an attempt to reuse authentication requests.


## Chapter 8 Principles of Security Models, Design, and Capabilities

- Be able to define object and subject in terms of access. The subject is the user or process that makes a request to access a resource. The object is the resource a user or process wants to access.
- Be able to describe open and closed systems. Open systems are designed using industry standards and are usually easy to integrate with other open systems. Closed systems are generally proprietary hardware and/or software. Their specifications are not normally published, and they are usually harder to integrate with other systems.
- Understand open and closed source. An open source solution is one where the source code, and other internal logic, is exposed to the public. A closed source solution is one where the source code and other internal logic is hidden from the public.
- Know about secure defaults. Never assume the default settings of any product are secure. It is always up to the system’s administrator and/or company security staff to alter a product’s settings to comply with the organization’s security policies.
- Understand the concept of fail securely. Failure management includes programmatic error handling (aka exception handling) and input sanitization; secure failure is integrated into the system (fail-safe vs. fail-secure).
- Know about the principle of “keep it simple.” “Keep it simple” is the encouragement to avoid overcomplicating the environment, organization, or product design. The more complex a system, the more difficult it is to secure.
- Understand zero trust. Zero trust is a security concept where nothing inside the organization is automatically trusted. Each request for activity or access is assumed to be from an unknown and untrusted location until otherwise verified. The concept is “never trust, always verify.” The zero trust model is based around “assume breach” and microsegmentation.
- Know about Privacy by Design. Privacy by Design (PbD) is a guideline to integrate privacy protections into products during the early design phase rather than attempting to tack them on at the end of development. The PbD framework is based on seven foundational principles.
- Understand “trust but verify.” “Trust but verify” is a traditional security approach of trusting subjects and devices within the company’s security perimeter automatically. This type of security approach leaves an organization vulnerable to insider attacks and grants intruders the ability to easily perform lateral movement among internal systems.
- Know what confinement, bounds, and isolation are. Confinement restricts a process to reading from and writing to certain memory locations. Bounds are the limits of memory a process cannot exceed when reading or writing. Isolation is the mode a process runs in when it is confined through the use of memory bounds.
- Know how security controls work and what they do. Security controls use access rules to limit the access by a subject to an object.
- Understand trust and assurance. A trusted system is one in which all protection mechanisms work together to process sensitive data for many types of users while maintaining a stable and secure computing environment. In other words, trust is the presence of a security mechanism or capability. Assurance is the degree of confidence in satisfaction of security needs. In other words, assurance is how reliable the security mechanisms are at providing security.
- Define a trusted computing base (TCB). A TCB is the combination of hardware, software, and controls that form a trusted base that enforces the security policy.
- Be able to explain what a security perimeter is. A security perimeter is the imaginary boundary that separates the TCB from the rest of the system. TCB components communicate with non-TCB components using trusted paths.
- Know what the reference monitor and the security kernel are. The reference monitor is the logical part of the TCB that confirms whether a subject has the right to use a resource prior to granting access. The security kernel is the collection of the TCB components that implement the functionality of the reference monitor.
- Know details about each of the security models. Know the security models and their functions:
  - The state machine model ensures that all instances of subjects accessing objects are secure.
  - The information flow model is designed to prevent unauthorized, insecure, or restricted information flow.
  - The noninterference model prevents the actions of one subject from affecting the system state or actions of another subject.
  - The take-grant model dictates how rights can be passed from one subject to another or from a subject to an object.
  - An access control matrix is a table of subjects and objects that indicates the actions or functions that each subject can perform on each object.
  - Bell–LaPadula subjects have a clearance level that allows them to access only those objects with the corresponding classification levels, which protects confidentiality.
  - Biba prevents subjects with lower security levels from writing to objects at higher security levels.
  - Clark–Wilson is an integrity model that relies on the access control triplet (i.e., subject/ program/object).
  - Goguen–Meseguer and Sutherland models focus on integrity.
  - Graham–Denning focuses on the secure creation and deletion of both subjects and objects.
  - The Harrison–Ruzzo–Ullman (HRU) model focuses on the assignment of object access rights to subjects as well as the integrity (or resilience) of those assigned rights.
  - The Common Criteria (ISO/IEC 15408) is a subjective security function evaluation tool that uses protection profiles (PPs) and security targets (STs) and assigns an Evaluation Assurance Level (EAL).
  - Authorization to Operate (ATO) (from the RMF) is a formal approval to operate IT/IS based on an acceptable risk level based on the implementation of an agreed-on set of security and privacy controls.
- Understand the security capabilities of information systems. Common security capabilities include memory protection, virtualization, Trusted Platform Module (TPM), encryption/